.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Christian Rößner
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only
.TH NAUTHILUS-DIRECTOR.YAML 5 "2026-05-26" "nauthilus-director" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
nauthilus-director.yaml \- Nauthilus Director YAML configuration format
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nauthilus-director.yaml
is the canonical name for the Director configuration file format.
Files ending in
.B .yml
are also accepted.
.PP
The default format is YAML.
The loader also supports common Viper formats where practical, but operator
documentation and examples use YAML.
.SH STABLE PATH GROUPS
.TP
.B runtime
Process identity, shutdown timing, client timeouts and listener groups.
.TP
.B runtime.servers.control
The in-process control API listener, control authentication and control TLS.
.TP
.B observability
Logging, metrics, tracing and diagnostic profiles.
.TP
.B storage.redis
Central Redis connection, security, Cluster, Sentinel, namespace and health
settings for production runtime coordination.
.TP
.B auth.authorities
Nauthilus authentication authorities, HTTP and gRPC transport settings,
mechanism policy and protected caller credentials.
.TP
.B director.listeners
Public protocol listeners, TLS, PROXY protocol, service names, authorities and
backend-pool bindings.
.TP
.B director.routing
Selector defaults, hash inputs, default shard and failover policy.
.TP
.B director.affinity
Active user pinning, affinity key construction, release timing, failover and
local cache behavior.
.TP
.B director.runtime_overrides
Runtime control permissions for backend and user operations.
.TP
.B director.health
Backend health timing, jitter and transition thresholds.
.TP
.B director.maintenance
Default maintenance mode, drain timing, hard-kill grace and audit behavior.
.TP
.B director.backend_pools
Backend pool protocol, selector and backend membership.
.TP
.B director.backends
Backend protocol, shard, address, weight, max connections, maintenance baseline,
transport security, authentication and health checks.
.SH LMTP LISTENERS AND BACKENDS
LMTP listener entries use
.B director.listeners.<name>.protocol: lmtp
and bind to an LMTP backend pool with
.BR backend_pool .
Plain LMTP listeners normally use
.B tls.mode: starttls
when STARTTLS is offered.
LMTPS-style listeners use
.B tls.mode: implicit
and still use
.B protocol: lmtp
with an operator-facing service name such as
.BR lmtps .
.PP
Supported listener-specific LMTP settings live under
.BR director.listeners.<name>.lmtp .
The implemented surface uses configured
.B capabilities
for the
.B LHLO
reply, including SMTPUTF8, and peer authentication through
.BR client_auth .
Peer authentication verifies the submitting LMTP peer; it is separate from
recipient routing and does not authenticate the mailbox recipient.
.PP
LMTP backend entries use
.B director.backends.<name>.protocol: lmtp
and should share
.B shard_tag
values with other protocol backends that represent the same mail shard.
Backend TLS, SASL, OAuth bearer, credential replay, master-user and health-check
settings use the shared backend config paths.
BDAT forwarding is available only when the configured frontend capability and
backend capability boundary allow CHUNKING.
.PP
LMTP route lookup through
.BR nauthilus-directorctl (1)
accepts
.B --recipient
for recipient diagnostics.
It is a read-only route explanation; it may use the configured no-auth
Nauthilus identity lookup path, but it does not authenticate credentials, create
sessions, open backend connections or mutate Redis state.
.SH OBSERVABILITY SAFETY
LMTP logs, traces and Prometheus metrics expose operation, result, bounded
reason class, backend pool, shard tag, mechanism, transport, TLS mode and status
class where applicable.
Metric labels remain low-cardinality and do not include usernames, recipients,
client addresses, session IDs, backend identifiers, raw errors or secrets.
.PP
Observable LMTP output must not contain raw recipients, envelope senders,
message IDs, subjects, DATA or BDAT content, peer passwords, bearer tokens,
SASL blobs, private keys or raw authorization headers.
Operators should use status classes and reason classes to distinguish routing,
same-backend policy, backend, DATA and BDAT failures without exposing message
content.
.SH INCLUDES AND PATCHES
Loader-only keys
.BR includes ,
.B env
and
.B patch
are processed before typed validation and are not present in the final runtime
snapshot or config dump output.
.PP
.B includes
supports required, optional and environment-specific include lists.
Relative include paths are resolved from the declaring file directory.
Recursive include cycles fail closed.
Missing required includes fail loading; missing optional includes are ignored.
.PP
.B patch
is a list of operations with
.BR op ,
.B path
and
.B value .
Supported operations are
.BR add ,
.B replace
and
.BR remove .
Patches from included files are collected before patches from the including
file and are applied before placeholder expansion.
.SH PLACEHOLDERS
Scalar values may use
.B ${NAME}
placeholders.
Expansion happens before mapstructure decoding and typed validation.
Map keys are never expanded.
Missing variables fail closed.
Ordinary dollar signs remain literal, and
.B $${NAME}
escapes a placeholder.
.SH ENVIRONMENT OVERRIDES
Stable scalar config paths can be overridden with
.B NAUTHILUS_DIRECTOR_
environment variables derived from the config path.
For example,
.B runtime.servers.control.address
maps to
.BR NAUTHILUS_DIRECTOR_RUNTIME_SERVERS_CONTROL_ADDRESS .
Overrides are applied after placeholder expansion and before typed validation.
.SH REDACTION AND PROTECTED VALUES
Passwords, token files, private keys and other secret-bearing fields are marked
as protected in the typed config model.
Config dump output is redacted by default.
Local
.B nauthilus-director config dump -P
and remote
.B nauthilus-directorctl config dump -P
are the explicit protected-value paths.
Remote protected output additionally requires the Director to authorize the
protected config request; a
.B 403
response means no protected output is printed.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nauthilus-director (1),
.BR nauthilus-directorctl (1)
