.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Christian Rößner
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only
.TH NAUTHILUS-DIRECTOR 1 "2026-05-29" "nauthilus-director" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nauthilus-director \- run and inspect the Nauthilus Director server process
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nauthilus-director
.RB [ --config
.IR path ]
.br
.B nauthilus-director
.RB [ --version ]
.RB [ --help ]
.RB [ --config
.IR path ]
.br
.B nauthilus-director
.RB [ --config
.IR path ]
.B serve
.br
.B nauthilus-director
.RB [ --config
.IR path ]
.B config dump -d
.RB [ -P ]
.RB [ --format
.IR yaml|json ]
.br
.B nauthilus-director
.RB [ --config
.IR path ]
.B config dump -n
.RB [ -P ]
.RB [ --format
.IR yaml|json ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nauthilus-director
is the server binary for the Director process.
Without a subcommand it starts the production server process, including the
configured IMAP, LMTP and LMTPS listeners and the in-process control API when
enabled.
The explicit
.B serve
subcommand is an alias for the same server startup path.
Use
.B --help
on the root command or any nested command to list available subcommands and
command-local options.
Long options require a double dash; single-dash options are reserved for
documented one-letter shorthand flags.
.PP
Runtime listener, backend, session, user, route lookup and reload operations
are managed through
.BR nauthilus-directorctl (1)
against the running control API.
Those runtime state changes do not rewrite YAML configuration files.
Listener runtime drain and resume state is process-local and non-persistent;
after restart, configured frontend listeners are started from the typed config
snapshot.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --version
Print the binary version and exit.
.TP
.B --help
Print command help and exit.
.TP
.BR --config " " \fIpath\fR ", " -c " " \fIpath\fR
Read configuration from
.IR path
for server startup and commands that inspect local server configuration.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B serve
Start the production server process explicitly.
When no subcommand is supplied this is the default behavior.
.TP
.B config dump -d|--defaults
Print canonical default configuration for the server process.
.TP
.B config dump -n|--non-default
Print non-default effective configuration after loading the selected config
file, includes, patches, placeholders and environment overrides.
.TP
.B -P|--protected
Include protected values in config dump output.
Without
.B -P
protected values are redacted.
.TP
.BR --format " " \fIyaml|json\fR ", " -f " " \fIyaml|json\fR
Select config dump serialization.
YAML is the default.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
The command succeeded.
.TP
.B 1
The command reached local runtime processing but the operation failed.
.TP
.B 2
The command line or local configuration was invalid.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nauthilus-directorctl (1),
.BR nauthilus-director.yaml (5)
